Now, to understand how authentication works,
it is important to really understand
why we need authentication in the first place.
And the answer here is that we need authentication
in a website because some content should be protected.
Not all users and visitors of our website
should be able to access all content.
That's why we have authentication in place.
Now, content can be different things.
Sometimes you have pages on your site
that should be locked if users
are not authenticated.
For example, throughout this course section,
we are going to work on this demo website here
and there we have this dummy starting page.
Then we have this login page
where we can also create new users
and we have this profile page
where users can change their password.
And for example, this page, this profile page
should only be accessible to users
who are logged in.
And if you are not logged in,
you should not be able to visit this page.
So this kind of content might be locked.
This page should maybe not be accessible
to non-logged in users.
But it's not just pages like this.
Protected content could also be some data
that you're storing in a database,
some API endpoints to which your React application
might be sending requests on certain pages
that should be locked for non-authenticated users,
and there are many examples you could come up with
but back on this page,
on this profile page,
it would be this Change Password request,
which we are sending when this button is clicked.
I mean, at the moment, nothing happens here.
We're going to build this together
but of course, when that button is clicked,
it would be a realistic expectation
that some request is sent to some server
to update this user's password in the database.
And even though we wanna lock down
this profile page entirely,
we also might want to lock down that API endpoint
to which we're sending this request
so that a request sent to this API endpoint can't succeed
if the user is not logged in
because if the API endpoint would not be locked down,
that would mean that any user
who knows the URL of that endpoint
could send a request to change the password
of some other user and that would be very insecure.
So that's why we might not just want
to restrict pages on our websites,
but also API endpoints
to which we send requests from inside our React app.
So that's why we need authentication.
And that brings up another question.
How does authentication then work in general?
And here the answer is quite straightforward.
In general, authentication is a two-step process.
The first step is always to get access,
to get the permission for this user.
And you get that access, that permission
by providing your credentials by logging in.
Of course, you, first of all, need to create an account
but once you've got that,
you do log in with your credentials,
this data is then sent to some server
where we can look into a database
and verify your password and email combination
and if that is valid,
the server, the backend to which the request is sent
grants this permission.
Then once we have this permission,
we can unlock certain pages on the website
and/or, depending on what we need to do,
use that permission to send subsequent requests
to other protected resources on an API endpoint.
So we first get that permission
and then we can send more requests
to other endpoints with that permission attached.
And that's indeed, how that generally works.
We have our client with the React app running in the browser
and some backend server
with some server-side code written by us
or written by someone else.
It can be a third-party API,
an external API with which we're working here
or it can be our own API.
And then we, first of all, send that request
with the email, password combination,
the server then verifies that,
checks our credentials
and then either grants permission
for further requests or denies that.
And then we can use that permission
as I described it a couple of seconds ago.
But is that enough
if we just get this permission
and we then can use this permission
for subsequent requests?
Well, it's not enough.
A yes or no alone is not enough
to then access protected resources like API endpoints.
And it's not enough because a yes or no
is easy to fake.
If the server to which we send our credentials
would just reply with a yes or no,
we could just skip that step
of getting the permission and just instead add our own yes
or no to requests for protected resources.
So that's why this is not enough
and why authentication is a bit more elaborate than that.
That part with sending and checking the credentials
all needs to happen but the response sent back
by the server to the client must be more
than just a yes or no.
And here we've got two main approaches,
which are commonly used.
We can either work with server-side sessions
or with authentication tokens.
Now, server-side sessions
are a very traditional approach of handling authentication
and they are a great approach of handling authentication.
With server-side sessions,
once a server grants you access,
that server stores a unique identifier
for your client, so for this specific user
who was just granted access.
The server generates and stores some unique identifier
for this specific client
and therefore, every visitor of a website
who authenticates gets his or her own identifier stored
on the server.
But this identifier is not just stored on the server,
it's also sent back to the client.
So the response of the server
is not just this yes or no
but instead, it does now also
include this unique identifier.
So the server and the client,
both parties know this identifier.
And then it's this identifier,
which is attached to future requests to this server
and since the server knows this identifier,
this identifier can't be faked.
If you come up with your own random identifier,
the server won't know it
and access will be denied for this subsequent request.
So that's a great mechanism.
But this mechanism has one disadvantage.
It works great if your backend, your server
and your front end are tightly coupled
but if you've got decoupled ends,
if you've got your Single Page Application served
by server A and you've got your backend application,
your REST API served by server B,
then there is no tight coupling.
The backend API probably should work independent
from the front-end Single Page Application
and vice versa.
Or if you are building an API
that is there to be used by many websites,
think about something like the Google Maps API,
then, of course, this API also can't be tightly coupled
and focused on one specific front end.
Instead it needs to stay flexible.
And that's why then you don't wanna store some identifier
on the server.
The server should be stateless, as it's called.
The server should not store this kind of data
about the connected clients.
There is a decoupled backend and front-end situation.
And you will very often have to deal with that
when building Single Page Applications
and that's therefore, the part I wanna focus on
in this module
because in this situation,
you can use authentication tokens
because the idea here is generally is the same.
There is just one key difference.
The general idea still is that you send some credentials,
email and password to a server
and the server validates those credentials
by comparing your email password combination
to what's stored in the database.
Then if that's valid,
the server creates a permission token,
which is basically just a very long string
with some data encoded into that string.
The server will basically use some algorithm
to encode some data, like the email address
of the user and a bunch of other pieces of data
into one string,
which can be decoded back
into these individual pieces of data.
It's really just a way of gluing different pieces
of data together.
Now, this token will be generated by the server
with a specific algorithm and very important,
with a key, which will be used for hashing that data
into a string,
which is only known by the server.
So there is a key involved,
which is only known by the server, not by the client.
Now, this token is not stored by the server
but sent back to the client
but only the server knows how to create that token
because of that key which is involved.
Now, therefore, the client can then use this token,
so the React app is able to use that token
to attach it to future requests
to protected resources on the server.
And even though the server hasn't stored this identifier,
as it did in the session approach,
the server is able to verify
that this token was created by it
because only the server knows this private key,
which was involved in the token creation process
and therefore, the incoming token,
which is attached to the request
for some protected resource
can be validated by the server
because the server is able to check if that token
could have been created by it, by the server.
And if the token was faked or created
with a different key,
then the server will detect this and will deny access.
So this is then another secure way
of identifying a client to the server.
And this is an approach that allows for decoupling
of front-end and backend
and it's therefore, the approach we're going to use
in this course module.